Rework section on persistent congestion (#3961)
quicwg/base-drafts: draft-ietf-quic-recovery.md

## Persistent Congestion {#persistent-congestion}

When a sender establishes loss of all in-flight packets sent over a long enough
duration, the network is considered to be experiencing persistent congestion.

### Duration {#pc-duration}

The persistent congestion duration is computed as follows:

~~~
(smoothed_rtt + max(4*rttvar, kGranularity) + max_ack_delay) *
    kPersistentCongestionThreshold
~~~

Unlike the PTO computation in {{pto}}, this duration includes the max_ack_delay
irrespective of the packet number spaces in which losses are established.

> This duration allows a sender to send as many packets, including some in
> response to PTO expiration, as TCP does with Tail Loss Probe ({{RACK}}), before
> establishing persistent congestion, as TCP does with a Retransmission Timeout
> ({{?RFC5681}}).

Reviewer: This many parenthetical phrases in commas is tough to parse.  Can we divide it up a little more?  Into multiple sentences, by using something other than commas, or by condensing?

```suggestion
This duration allows a sender to send as many packets before
establishing persistent congestion, including some in
response to PTO expiration, as TCP does with a Retransmission Timeout
({{?RFC5681}}) and a Tail Loss Probe ({{RACK}}).
```

Author: slightly rephrased, but taken.

The RECOMMENDED value for kPersistentCongestionThreshold is 3, which is
approximately equivalent to two TLPs before an RTO in TCP.

This design does not use consecutive PTO events to establish persistent
congestion, since application patterns impact PTO expirations. For example, a
sender that sends small amounts of data with silence periods between them
restarts the PTO timer every time it sends, potentially preventing the PTO timer
from expiring for a long period of time, even when no acknowledgments are being
received. The use of a duration enables a sender to establish persistent

> congestion without depending on the occurrence of PTOs.

Reviewer 2: We use expiry elsewhere, so maybe this is slightly clearer?

```suggestion
congestion without depending on the expiry of PTOs.
```

### Establishing Persistent Congestion

A sender establishes persistent congestion on receiving an acknowledgement if at
least two ack-eliciting packets are declared lost, and:

* a prior RTT sample existed when both packets were sent;

> * the duration between the send times of these two packets exceeds the

Reviewer 2: I think this is still ambiguous if more than 2 packets are lost, so I'm reusing language below.

```suggestion
* the duration between the send times of the oldest and newest lost packet exceeds the
```

Author: That's still not adequate. The point here is that there's a contiguous period that is long enough, and the duration has to be between two packets that were marked lost, not necessarily the oldest and the newest packets. For example, consider that 
- packets 1-10 were sent,
- all odd packets were marked lost: 1, 3, 5, 7, 9.
- the duration between 1 and 9 was greater than the persistent congestion duration.

According to the existing design, this should not be considered persistent congestion, but with your proposed text, it will be.

Reviewer 2: There's a requirement that all packets between the largest and smallest are marked lost as well, so my suggested change would still not declare this as persistent congestion(assuming 2, 4, 6 or 8 were acknowledged).

I still think this is unclear if more than 2 packets are lost, so maybe you have a suggestion?

Author: We can't require all packets between largest and smallest be acked; see my comment: https://github.com/quicwg/base-drafts/pull/3961#discussion_r463907388.

Reviewer 2: Sorry for the confusion, I now have what you have in mind.

If you put this bullet after the next one, I think this will be clearer.

Reviewer: Actually, I might move that third bullet to be first.  Conceptually, it frames the idea that they're the first and last packets of a 2+ packet sequence.

Author: Yup, suggestions taken.

## Persistent Congestion {#persistent-congestion}

When a sender establishes loss of all in-flight packets sent over a long enough
duration, the network is considered to be experiencing persistent congestion.

> ### Duration {#duration}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Duration {#pc-duration}
```

The persistent congestion duration is computed as follows:

~~~
(smoothed_rtt + max(4*rttvar, kGranularity) + max_ack_delay) *
    kPersistentCongestionThreshold
~~~

Note that unlike the PTO computation in {{pto}}, this duration includes the
max_ack_delay irrespective of the packet number spaces in which losses are
established.

> This duration is intended to allow a sender to use initial PTOs for aggressive

Reviewer 3: What is an "initial PTO"?  I think that you want to rephrase this.

Is the intent not to give the sender an opportunity to send multiple times before declaring PC?  And that we want to allow for more than one probe packet to be sent so that transient loss does not cause PC unnecessarily.

> This duration is intended to allow a sender to use initial PTOs for aggressive
> probing, as TCP does with Tail Loss Probe (TLP; see {{RACK}}), before

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This duration is intended to allow a sender to use one or more PTOs for
probing, as TCP does with Tail Loss Probe (TLP; see {{RACK}}), before
```

establishing persistent congestion, as TCP does with a Retransmission Timeout
(RTO; see {{?RFC5681}}).

The RECOMMENDED value for kPersistentCongestionThreshold is 3, which is
approximately equivalent to two TLPs before an RTO in TCP.

This design uses an explicit duration instead of consecutive PTO events since
the PTO timer is restarted every time an ack-eliciting packet is sent. An

> application that trickles data restarts the PTO timer repeatedly, preventing the

Reviewer 2: nit: Is everyone going to understand trickle in this context?

Reviewer 4: Yeah I think this paragraph is a little confusing. I think the intent is basically suggesting that an application which itself is steadily writing relatively small amounts of data into the transport will perpetuate the PTO timer, and hence detecting persistent congestion should not depend on this. However the use of "application" and "trickle" together is probably going to be confusing to some.

Additionally it seems like the first sentence and the last sort of overlap, which makes the paragraph read a little strangely.

Author: I've reworded the para, PTAL.

PTO timer from expiring for a potentially long period of time. A consequence of
this design is that persistent congestion can be established without the
occurrence of any PTOs.

### Declaring Persistent Congestion

A sender declares persistent congestion on receiving an acknowledgement, if the
following conditions are true:

> * there are at least two ack-eliciting packets that are declared lost;

Reviewer 2: How could this not be true given other requirements?
Also should this be kPersisentCongestion - 1?

Author: This could be any number of packets, but the two are the edges -- the earliest and the latest that we consider for the interval.

Author: Gah! #3889 was a bit problematic. Moving this discussion to the issue.

> * there are at least two ack-eliciting packets that are declared lost;

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* there are at least two ack-eliciting packets that are declared lost, after at
  least one RTT sample was obtained;
```

Author: We could make it a separate condition

Reviewer 5: That works. I use the form of review comment just to make sure that this requirement would be incorporated.

Author: added, and also added a rationale

> * the duration between the send times of these two packets exceeds the

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* the duration between the send times of these packets exceeds the
```

"two" was a bit confusing for me, because the previous sentence talks about "at least two."

>   persistent congestion duration ({{duration}}); and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  persistent congestion duration ({{pc-duration}}); and
```

* all packets sent between those times are declared lost.

Since network congestion is not affected by packet number spaces, persistent
congestion SHOULD be established across packet number spaces. A sender that does
not have state for all packet number spaces or an implementation that cannot
compare send times across packet number spaces MAY use state for just the packet
number space that was acknowledged.

When persistent congestion is declared, the sender's congestion window MUST be
reduced to the minimum congestion window (kMinimumWindow).  This response of
collapsing the congestion window on persistent congestion is functionally
similar to a sender's response on a Retransmission Timeout (RTO) in TCP

> ({{RFC5681}}) after Tail Loss Probes (TLP; see {{RACK}}).

Reviewer 3: The repetition of the RTO and TLP citations seems a little duplicative here.

```suggestion
({{RFC5681}}) after Tail Loss Probes ({{RACK}}).
```

max_ack_delay irrespective of the packet number spaces in which losses are
established.

This duration allows a sender to send enough packets, including some in response
to PTO expiration, as TCP does with Tail Loss Probe ({{RACK}}), before
establishing persistent congestion, as TCP does with a Retransmission Timeout
({{?RFC5681}}).

The RECOMMENDED value for kPersistentCongestionThreshold is 3, which is
approximately equivalent to two TLPs before an RTO in TCP.

This design does not use consecutive PTO events to establish persistent
congestion, since a PTO expiration is controlled by application patterns in
addition to network activity. For example, a sender that sends small amounts of
data with silence periods between them restarts the PTO timer every time it
sends, potentially preventing the PTO timer from expiring for a long period of
time, even when no acknowledgments are being received. The use of a duration
enables a sender to establish persistent congestion without depending on the
occurrence of PTOs.

### Establishing Persistent Congestion

A sender establishes persistent congestion on receiving an acknowledgement, if
the following conditions are true:

> * a prior RTT sample exists;

Reviewer 6: More specific: a RTT sample existed at the time the first packet of the range was sent

Author: This reflects the resolution in #3889. I think the resolution there is adequate. Doing this as an RTT sample at the time the first packet in the range is sent, requires more state, IMO.

Reviewer 6: #3889 says exactly that:
> The persistent congestion period SHOULD NOT start until there is at least one RTT sample.

... which means that you need to have had a RTT sample when you sent the first packet, right?

Author: You're right -- but this was not resolved correctly. I've changed the language now to match what's in the draft as you proposed, and I've filed #3972.

## Persistent Congestion {#persistent-congestion}

When a sender establishes loss of all in-flight packets sent over a long enough
duration, the network is considered to be experiencing persistent congestion.

### Duration {#pc-duration}

The persistent congestion duration is computed as follows:

~~~
(smoothed_rtt + max(4*rttvar, kGranularity) + max_ack_delay) *
    kPersistentCongestionThreshold
~~~

Unlike the PTO computation in {{pto}}, this duration includes the max_ack_delay
irrespective of the packet number spaces in which losses are established.

> This duration allows a sender to send enough packets, including some in response

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This duration allows a sender to send as many packets, including some in response
```

to PTO expiration, as TCP does with Tail Loss Probe ({{RACK}}), before
establishing persistent congestion, as TCP does with a Retransmission Timeout
({{?RFC5681}}).

The RECOMMENDED value for kPersistentCongestionThreshold is 3, which is
approximately equivalent to two TLPs before an RTO in TCP.

This design does not use consecutive PTO events to establish persistent

> congestion, since a PTO expiration is controlled by application patterns in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
congestion, since a PTO expiration is influenced by application patterns in
```

Reviewer 2: Or maybe something else.  Controlled seems odd to me.

addition to network activity. For example, a sender that sends small amounts of
data with silence periods between them restarts the PTO timer every time it
sends, potentially preventing the PTO timer from expiring for a long period of
time, even when no acknowledgments are being received. The use of a duration
enables a sender to establish persistent congestion without depending on the
occurrence of PTOs.

### Establishing Persistent Congestion

A sender establishes persistent congestion on receiving an acknowledgement, if
the following conditions are true:

* there are at least two ack-eliciting packets that are declared lost;

* a prior RTT sample existed at the time these packets were sent;

> * the duration between the send times of these packets exceeds the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* the duration between the send times of the first and last lost packets exceeds the
```

Author: This isn't correct. @marten-seemann had an example where:
- 1 - 10 are sent
- on ack, 1-4 and 6-9 are marked lost
- 1-4 have a period that exceeds the PC threshold. 

The text here allows for this to result in persistent congestion. I've changed the text here to be clearer.

  persistent congestion duration ({{pc-duration}}); and

* all packets sent between those times are declared lost.

The persistent congestion period SHOULD NOT start until there is at least one
RTT sample. Before the first RTT sample, a sender arms its PTO timer based on
the initial RTT ({{pto-handshake}}), which could be substantially larger than
the actual RTT. Requiring a prior RTT sample prevents a sender from establishing
persistent congestion with potentially too few probes.

Since network congestion is not affected by packet number spaces, persistent
congestion SHOULD consider packets sent across packet number spaces. A sender
that does not have state for all packet number spaces or an implementation that
cannot compare send times across packet number spaces MAY use state for just the
packet number space that was acknowledged.

When persistent congestion is declared, the sender's congestion window MUST be

> reduced to the minimum congestion window (kMinimumWindow).  This response of
> collapsing the congestion window on persistent congestion is functionally
> similar to a sender's response on a Retransmission Timeout (RTO) in TCP
> ({{RFC5681}}) after Tail Loss Probes ({{RACK}}).

Reviewer 2: This sentence repeats lines 844 to 847, so I'd be inclined to remove it.

```suggestion
reduced to the minimum congestion window (kMinimumWindow).
```

Author: Trimmed and rephrased.
